[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, you know,
we talk all the time about USChina
relations multiple times a month, it
seems,
>> for obvious reasons. We, you know, we
usually get it from something resembling
a US perspective. Not always, but I
think it's a bit skewed.
>> Yeah, there is a geographic bias at play
for sure
>> and a linguistic one.
>> Yes, but you're right. There is always a
lot going on with USChina relations and
especially recently. Right. So, we're
recording this on September 16th, and we
have Chinese and American officials
gathering in I think it's Madrid to talk
trade, try to hammer out some sort of
deal on the tariffs. By the time this
episode comes out, maybe USChina
relations will have changed completely,
but uh somehow I doubt it.
>> There's going to be some new era of
peace. Everything is going to be solved.
There's going to be no more anxiety
about trade. a Tik Tok deal will have
been made with the perfect algorithm
that satisfies everyone everything. No,
probably unlikely. Probably we are going
to be talking about some version of this
for a long time. I don't want to say,
you know, it's not like our perspectives
are just strictly US. You know, we
talked to Cameron Johnson who works in
China regular. So, it's not none, but we
obviously have to uh change the mixup.
>> I admire your efforts at being
unpartisan. Well, crossborder, you know,
we have to still do it via Zoom
obviously, but isn't this a long
historic trend to try to like build
build dialogue between multiple sides
and get multiple perspectives in the
hopes of achieving something bigger than
that?
>> What I'm going to say is we need to go
to Beijing
>> mostly for the food, but also for uh
inter US China dialogue.
>> The dream is that in 2026 we host a live
it's in Beijing. We're putting it out
into the world right now in the hope
that we can manifest it into existence.
>> Yes.
>> All right. Well, I am really excited to
say that in these efforts, we really do
have the perfect guest. We are going to
be speaking with uh Henry Wong. He is
the founder and president for the Center
for China and Globalization. It's the
largest independent think tank in China.
Someone perfectly placed to talk about
all of these topics from a Chinese
perspective that we don't usually get.
So, Henry, thank you so much for uh
coming on the podcast.
>> Thank you. Yeah, my pleasure.
>> What is the center for China and
globalization? Why did you found it?
What is its goal? What is this
independent think tank that exists?
>> Yes, we actually founded uh since 208
actually.
>> Yeah.
>> Right after the Beijing Olympics. You
know, at that time, you know, when we
watched the Beijing Olympic, the slogan
for the Olympics then was one word, one
dream. So we thought that that is
actually it's a globalization and uh and
China actually embarked on a
globalization era because I think
Olympic Beijing Olympic in 208 was
something that China starting to really
looking globally and uh so that's where
we we start to found this uh think tank
at first I have to take out a lot of
savings you know I was doing a lot of
business before but we really want to
start this but I I really have found
this think tank to kind of combine my
experience in a government business and
academic
And also you know since then it's 17 18
years now and we become one of the top
100 think tank in the world actually
ranked four times in the top country by
the University of Pennsylvania think
tank and service society program. So so
so CCG you know abbreviation for center
for China global is a bridge is a
communication platform dialogue platform
and also it's a research platform for uh
big issues policy issues uh regarding US
and China global governance uh global
economy and of course global migration
so just to name a few but uh but since
then we've been doing okay we had about
over uh 60 70 people and we we've been
based in Beijing and Hjo and and Guangjo
a few places in China and uh we've been
very active. We're doing a 100 event a
year. We publish a dozen books and
multiple reports. So, so thank you for
for for asking that. M so uh you
described the center as something of a
bridge and I was reading an economist
article from a couple years ago where
you yourself are described as something
of a gobetween for technocratic
government ministries, Chinese
entrepreneurs and foreign embassies in
Beijing. So my question is how busy have
you been lately?
>> We are pretty busy. I just give you a
few examples. For example, last week I
was in Shaman attending September 8 the
25 annual China uh investment and
business forum and expo there and the
vice premier Hurong who is now in Madrid
talking with Scott Benson was there uh
opening up that forum and uh so I was
speaking at a keynote speaker at one of
the bricks summit uh conference there
but also just uh Friday uh senator of a
China government hold another conference
at uh China international service expo
you know held in Beijing uh where
there's another 100 some countries come
as well and uh yesterday we had our 17th
monthly VIP launching and we have a 10
ambassadors from European from Japan
from Turkey from many other countries
quite a number from European countries
and just yesterday with 50 people also
IMF representative in China. We have a
lot of multinational global media and
also of course uh last night I attended
a relevant reception. The US embassy
hold a reception welcoming the new
deputy head of the mission
>> Mr. Greg and and he actually made an
excellent speech there. He said uh China
and US relation now rather than in the
past I mean you know I I know that in
the past we had a lot of strategic
rivalry but the new head of new deputy
head of the US mission here in China and
said now we should put strategic
stability he's not talking about
strategic arrival so strategic stability
in maintaining US China relation and
secretary rubio also said that in July
so it's very encouraging to see I going
on. But that's also shows how busy we
are meeting all the peoples and talking
to all the parties and and business too.
>> I get that various people might describe
an ambition for stability. It does not
typically feel like it when I read the
headlines that this is a stable
relationship for various reasons,
particularly the headlines that come out
of the Trump administration, which
strike me as volatile. Setting aside
what you hear from officials whether at
the embassy or um the state department,
does it feel like that is the
trajectory? Cuz it certainly feels
especially over the last 10 years that
when I was younger the relationship felt
something more like stability and that
these days it's much more about rivalry
and anxiety about potential conflict.
>> That's right. I I agree with you. I
think that basically because of uh uh
this deterioration since the first Trump
administration you know 2017 uh and now
8 years later the the region does really
go down quite a lot already and because
in the 2017
the national security committee of US
has put out a strategic report and
according a strategic rivalry number one
I mean before Russia actually so so we
see that since then we had a trade war
and the tariff war. But this second term
somehow we I felt uh well in China uh it
bit more uh you know getting used to
this kind of a tariff trade war and
China is also better prepared than the
other countries because we already
experienced in the first Trump
administration.
>> Uh so now I think also China economy is
is is second only to the US. the two
countries has too much independence
among each other and uh so you know
because geopolitically we are really
looking very bad and then I think the
consensus on both government is that we
need to look for some stability because
we can't change each other we cannot
wipe you know delete each other we we
have to coexist peacefully and that's
probably the conclusion that we're we're
getting there and so we have to uh seek
a common ground and coexisting even we
are having a lot of different views and
ideas.
>> So you mentioned just then the idea of
the world's two biggest economies being
more dependent on each other. Um perhaps
less so nowadays but over I guess the
decades of the early 2000s um certainly
they grew more dependent on each other
because of globalization. And this is
something that I wanted to ask you which
is what exactly is China's definition or
understanding of globalization? And I
ask this because I think in the west
it's sort of generally thought of as
this process of more countries trading
with each other and again becoming more
economically dependent on each other.
But there's also this sort of social
element that's also in there because I
think the assumption was always that as
countries trade more with each other
they're going to start sharing you know
values um whether those are political or
social. And I'm curious if globalization
is thought of the same way in China.
Well, I think that uh uh in China
because it was a late commerce, you
know, uh uh for example, you see the
globalization in the 19th century which
is uh you know uh Britain invented steam
power that led the industrial revolution
in the 19th century and 20th century
American invented you know internet
computers and and digital and US is led
in the 20th century. I think 21st
century China is is also you know coming
up now for example on the green power
China is leading on EVs on on the solar
panels and and also the wind power and
all the same but in the globalization
concept in the Chinese mind is really
more referred to the economic
globalization because uh because that's
the benefit they're getting uh
substantially for example 800 million
people has been lifted out of poverty
since China embraced opening up
basically embraced the globalization
And then uh you can see China now is the
largest trading nation or major trading
nation with 157 countries around the
world. And also furthermore uh China is
uh have since opening up in the last uh
47 years. China has about almost 10
million student study abroad. I mean
almost half of that in the United
States. So that means globalization. I
think there's a there a flow of people,
flow of talent, uh flow of goods uh you
know internet connectivities
uh fast uh uh you know stock market
exchange listed with each other uh and
also business doing you know there are
70,000 US company uh operating in China
and generating 700 billion revenues here
in China and uh uh and also uh you know
Apple make 80 90% of iPhone in China and
Tesla make 50% of its EV cars in China
and Walmart purchase about 60% of its
supplies from China. So I think that
that's probably the coin China felt the
substantial benefit uh probably for both
Chinese and also American consumers.
They are less ideological but they're
more probably uh on economic sense that
uh uh globalization is really bring them
a lot of good and benefit. For example,
since China joined the WTO in 20 2011,
China's GDP has gone up 13 14 times. So
that really I think in in the minds of
Chinese when they talk about
globalization, they're really uh talking
about join uh economic globalization
rather than the sec global securization.
They don't want to see the arcus. They
don't want to see the quad. They don't
want to see camp David of Korea, Japan
and all those security or or NATO moving
to Asia. that kind of a militarized
globalization. They want to see more
economic globalization.
[Music]
I'm a huge personal beneficiary of these
students abroad living in the East
Village where there's been an absolute
explosion of amazing Chinese restaurants
in my neighborhood of New York City
because there are so many students
there. So, I'm personally very invested
in this trend continuing. But let's talk
a little bit more about the security
angle. You've actually written somewhat
recently that China could play some role
in the eventual hopeful end of Russia's
war with Ukraine. But we don't tend to
associate the Chinese government with
playing an active role in global
conflicts not directly near the borders
including Israel and Gaza which we uh
should talk about too. But when it comes
to something, you know, when it comes to
the Russia Ukraine war that tends to be
focused on, okay, the Europeans, the
role that US will play, is there going
to be a point in the near future, or is
there something we're missing where
China sees this conflict that is far
from its direct borders and wants to
play a more activist role in bringing
peace? Or is this something that is only
associated with the sort of American
style, Westernled style of
globalization? Well, I think that's
probably uh now the world is I mean I
was at uh Munich Security Conference uh
kickoff meeting in Berlin early this
year uh with the chairman of Munich
Security Conference. They issued a
report. I was discussing on that report
they called multipolarity. So we are
getting into multipolar war. I mean
China certainly become one of of this
multipolar war.
>> And then you can see what happened in
the in the Russian Ukraine war there.
It's getting nowhere. We had the Alaska
summit. Uh that's why I published an op
at the foreign policy two days before
the Alaska summit. Basically, I suggest
that uh if US defense secretary, I heard
him saying at the Munich security
conference that they want peacemaking
troops coming from European countries
and non-European countries. So what mean
by non-European countries? So I think
that uh countries could be this brick
countries from uh China, India, Brazil,
you know, South Africa or Turkey,
whatever bricks countries. But basically
again you see that when Trump actually
after the Alaska talking to G7 at White
House, Putin actually talked to to
President She before his Alaska and
talked to Lula, talked to Moody and
talked to the president of South Africa
after the Alaska. So I think that I I
recently seen Mong proposing that let's
have 26 European countries troops placed
into Ukraine but that get very strong
reaction from Russia that Putin said
okay if that is the case that we regard
it as as a NATO violation or something.
So we see that the excuse for Putin to
start the war is because the NATO troops
approaching uh Russian border. I mean
after three and a half years fight I
mean you have a NATO European troops
there again. I mean he will not probably
ending that war easily. So I think a
more extra guarantee for this
peacemaking in addition to NATO, EU and
and also US. Let's get China, India,
Brazil, those the largest buyers of of
Russian energy product and and what else
is really extra safekeeping for the for
the border and then by having Chinese
peacekeeping force there it will really
uh you know make you know make Russia
difficult to violate that peace border
because you know China has a lot of
influence on Russia. Same for India,
same for Brazil. So, so I think that uh
we are in the risk this we're stuck in
this uh you know Trump says you know he
started sanctioning again you're not
going anywhere but I think by adding the
China bricks element we probably see a
more security piece that's going to
happen.
>> What does China actually think its role
in the world should be? And we talked
about its role economically in the idea
of globalization. But setting aside
economies when it comes to geopolitical
security, what exactly does China want
to be?
>> Yes. Well, thank you. I think but
basically uh China is is a large country
of course, but it's basically
agricultural culture. You know, it's
basically you have a th 5,000 years
history. I interrupt the civilization.
It's based on an agricultural economy.
The farmers cultivate along the Yans
River and the Yellow River. And
Confucious said if your parent alive
don't travel far away. And then you can
you can only cultivate the land four
seasons that they can grow enough
vegetables and and and wheat and and
grain to to feed yourself. So it's
really that kind of a culture cultivated
the culture of China. And they are not
really a nation on the horses or like
Mongols. they're going to have
expeditions or going to have a
cononalize any places in in the mean
that is there was a marshall called Jung
had a big expedition trips uh uh beyond
almost to Africa also uh uh you know as
countries southeast Asia they never they
never stayed anywhere they never occupy
any places they all returned seven times
it was even earlier than Colombia so you
see that is really the culture China has
until now for the last 40 years China
hasn't started any war send any soldiers
anywhere or colonize any place or
invaded any other country. So I I think
geopolitically we had this big parade on
on September 3rd to commemorate the
second world war but I think China has
produced enough deterrence so that uh
you know probably if they are in any hot
conflict they have enough defenses to
detering that so so if we cannot have a
nuclear or hot war to mutually assure
destruction then the only thing remain
is is peaceful competition on economy uh
on the soft power on the culture on on
the people-to-people exchanges. So I
think China wants to really see let's
have a level playing field and let's
really compete on economic China now is
uh having 70% of global speed railway
60% of 5G networks of the world out of
the 10 largest container ports seven of
them in China. China also has uh 30
million college graduates every year and
uh you know they have a lot of things uh
that they're doing on on their own now
and also on on energy installation now
their electricity consumption is 2.5
times of US three times of Europe now
and in terms of green power China has
produced 15 16 million EV cars total
number of be 30 million and they have a
16 million charge stations in China
everywhere you very convenient to charge
your EV car now. So, so I think you know
they want to probably compete in those
area rather than geopolitically. So I
think maybe if China can play some
maintain some peacekeeping would be
great because China is the largest
peacekeeping budget contributor to the
UN. China is the largest peacekeeping
sending force among the P5 member
countries. So, so if China can do more
peacekeeping and also economically you
know China launched many initiative uh
below initiative uh China just did so uh
summit in in Tenzin where they establish
so bank they have a breaks bank new
development bank so they're doing all
this kind of economic stuff uh I think
that's how they view the world should be
intertwined more uh economically
business-wise uh rather than we are
really divided according to the
ideological uh divided according to
democracy versus autocracy and divided
by you know this this east or west. So
there's many things I think China is is
thinking a little differently. You
mentioned the United Nations and there's
sort of this question about the
relevance or the vitality of a lot of
these western developed multilateral
organizations WTO being among them but
UN specifically in your vision maybe
it's China's vision or maybe there's uh
distinct is it important to breathe new
life into these organizations or is
there a new set of organizations
including some of the ones that China
has set up itself Whether it's the
Barri, whether we're talking about the
bricks, whether we're talking about some
of these others, is the future more
okay, if we're going to have this sort
of new style of globalization, we
actually genuinely need new
organizations rather than the husks of
the organizations that were sort of
built out of the western liberal order.
>> Absolutely. I I think that's that's
quite true. I had I I have recently
recently uh wrote a book uh about my
dialogue with Graham Madison, the
founding de of Harvard Kennedy School
which become a very good sale in China.
And also English wise basically we find
that in our dialogue we we talk about US
China relation as as conjun twins you
know we cannot separate each other you
know if we want to separate each other
we we end up damage ourselves so so
that's the given so we should avoid this
hijis trap that grand medicine famously
defined but also on the other hand we
should also avoid the kinder trap which
means that when a new rising power
starting to catching up existing number
one power there's a vacuum in the global
public goods like when US was taking
place UK there's a lot of missing
linking points you know we got big
recession in the in the in the 30 1930s
and things like that so China actually
is US is now put a bit back on its
policy now it's become a mega you know
make me first make me great again and
and uh and rather than there's no
country really is looking at the global
public goods so that's what China is now
China has not backed on on on climate
change agreement. China strongly support
that and China has developed a very
climate friendly environment now and we
reach carbon neutral and carbon peak
ahead of time. But just to be clear,
these legacy organizations specifically
like the UN, does China feel like these
are are there bets that China is intends
to make that these are going to be
important institutions or are they
fading like many legacy institutions and
that the sort of new more stable order
that you may envision does it have to be
with a fresh set of multilateral
international organizations? No, I think
China is a is a strong support of of
existing UN system and as president she
just recently proposed the global
governance initiative. I mean on on five
point two or three point he was
emphasized the UN principle view and
charter of UN and also uh we we can help
to enhance improve and make it better
but but we should not just restart or
but but on the other hand we see UN also
getting quite marginalized and there's
been weakening and for example China
becoming the second largest donor to the
UN budget now close to US almost no
difference now and also when US pulling
out of the WHO
China committed 500 million US dollars
to WHO and when you know WTO is
marginalized China is working with
Europe Europeans to to do that but
furthermore I think China is still the
only public big country one of the
largest economy still proposing economic
corporation like like a belton row
initiative for the last 12 13 years
China invest over$1 trillion US dollars
for 3,000 project and also furthermore
China has started the China Africa
economic summit China Latin American
economic summit, China Assan economic
summit and China uh Central Asia and
China Arab economic summit. So it's all
economic related and furthermore and uh
while President Trump is raising 100
some country tariff China announced
they're going to going to reduce the
tariff of 53 least developing country
tariff zero for coming to China. So you
can see the contrast there. So I think
China is really providing enough public
goods to fill some of vacuum. US is
backing off on development on the global
south and on on the on the UN system.
You know, China is when US is pulling
out the UNISO. China is also a big
support of UNISO uh and and and so on
and so forth. So, so I think China is
doing a lot of that kind of activities.
Now,
>> when it comes to USChina relations, you
know, you mentioned that your book was
selling well in China. I'm really
curious, what is the biggest
misunderstanding or the biggest concern
that you hear from Chinese people on the
ground when it comes to US policy? And I
realize it's a little bit unfair. We're
treating you as a spokesman for an
entire country. Um, and China,
>> we really don't intend to do that.
>> We don't intend to do that. But I'd be
curious like what sort of questions do
you get on a daily basis from the
average Chinese person about America and
what it's doing? Well, I think the
biggest throwing point basically that
bothers
ordinary Chinese that we see the US uh
you know navies coming to Chinese Tyran
street or or South China Sea or quite
often we see uh you know airplane patrol
in this part of the world. We never see
Chinese uh aircraft or navy go to Hawaii
or go to Caribbean, you know, we never
see that. But we see the US military
person is very strong. We had the 40,000
uh US military personnel in South Korea
just just neighboring China and another
I don't know how many you know it's
quite 30 40,000 probably in Japan and we
have now in Philippine and then they
have also missiles mid range missiles
placed there and also they are going to
place new missiles in Japan now and and
South Korea so those things are actually
bought because because China felt you
know Taiwan is part of China and uh
certainly the people in the USA oh China
is a democra cy we have to defend that.
But China has a has a Chinese style
democracy, meritocracy. It also works
perfect you know not perfect but at
least work well for this most populous
country in the world. So I think you
know we all have a different uh
governing style but just because our
governing style is with you and then
that's why you need to because Taiwan
because the reason for protecting Taiwan
is Taiwan is a democracy that we have to
protect that but I think you know China
can also absorbing that and uh you know
China promised to Taiwan you know no tax
to be given uh to federal government lot
of autonomy and China announced that
Taiwan Taiwanese will be free to work in
the ma mainland you no visa needed do
anything needed. We are already 2
million Taiwanese working the mainland
and there's half a million husband wife
married across the street and then
before Tai even uh you know former
president of Taiwan you know there's 6
million mainland flooded Taiwan with
with with tourism sending the money
spending restaurant hotels you know
there was almost integrated already if
not for the foreign interference. So I I
think the Chinese say okay please maybe
just let us peacefully unified like like
Germany you had the you know East
Germany West Germany unified and and
let's also hope North Korea South Korea
unified so basically they would really
looking for less interference on that
and so I think that would be greatly
improving the region because in the
communicate that the established three
communicate China US have it set very
clear US will not maintain you We just
maintain normal time, no official ties.
But then we see US officials, parliament
man, Nancy Pelosi keep visiting Taiwan
or Taiwanese leaders coming to the
visiting US. So those probably bother a
bit of of ordinary Chinese. But of
course again we understand of course US
was was a world policeman for a long
time but now we see many countries uh
also the governing model is not working
perfectly. We have all the domestic
issues. uh US has it, European has it,
all the countries has that. But China on
the other hand seems uh maintain a
pretty good uh status and that's also
keep lifting people out of poverty. So I
think they should give China some uh
credit for doing that rather than okay
uh is is always show in front of China's
uh doorsteps and you have US parade of
military muscles all the time. you. So
that's a little bothering for the
Chinese. basically
>> when you think about China's
relationship with the other BRICS
countries uh with African countries with
uh the global south countries so to
speak have you seen substantive changes
in those relationships specifically
since the wake of October 2023 and the
start of the war on Gaza and countries
sort of rethinking uh you know has this
prompted a concrete rethinking about you
know you said the US was the global
policeman and a lot of people have
perceived that in the wake of this
ongoing war. Has there been a
substantive change in the way countries
want to have a relationship with China?
>> Well, absolutely you can you know this
series for the first time uh you see
China ASEAN summit at the GCC you know
Gulf countries all came to to ASEAN. So
you you had the first China Assan GCC
summit and then you can see also uh the
BRICS countries expanding that uh you
had you know uh UAE was there and and uh
there's a lot of you know Middle East
countries are really uh coming to China.
You have you also have the S Shanghai
corporation summit recently. You had the
Turkey, you had the Iranian president.
You have a lot of people from that
region. So I think China's role does
play because China for example a few
years ago China clinched the deal
between Sawudis and and Iranians rather
than you know we are seeing the current
chaos going on. China also causing the
14 different factions of Palestinian
group had a Beijing Palestinian
decoration and China could probably do
more in making a peace promoting peace
between Israel and Palestinian. China
also maintained good relation in the
past with Israel. So I I think that u
sooner or later probably those country
will realize that we cannot really let
just what happened uh the Gaza the
humanitarian crisis the you know deaths
of thousands of tens of thousands of
people uh what happened in your living
room on a daily basis I mean where is
where is the where's the you know
children are dying and all those things
so that kind of justice where is the
justice now so of course there's there's
there's always problem uh uh to start
with but I think we cannot because two
wrong doesn't make a right. I I really
think that we should continue to have
this international moral power that
United Nations Security Council should
really exercise rather than, you know,
be vetoed all the time. So I I'm
thinking, you know, China public could
play more role in the future. But that's
let's that's let's let's solve this
Ukraine crisis if the if the BRICS
country peacemaking can happen uh led by
China. And I'm sure that model could be
applied to other conflicts in other
region. China also trying to you can see
Prime Minister Modi and Prime Minister
of Pakistan was at the same table a few
months after the fighting in China and
we said Armenia and and Aabaijan
president coming to SO summit in Tangent
as well. So probably China is is is
building up its mediating power and
peacekeeping power as time goes on.
[Music]
Just going back to globalization for a
second. I think everyone agrees and
you've already talked about this that
China has been a huge beneficiary from
globalization over time. But I get the
sense that there is still a feeling
within China that some aspects of the
global economic order or trade
agreements are unfair to China. How do
you sort of square that tension and
where do you think the concern or the
worries over unfairness actually comes
from? And by the way, I could ask this
question to American officials as well.
like the US is a massive beneficiary of
the global economic order and yet the
Trump administration clearly feels very
agrieved about America's place in the
world but when it comes to China like
where does the sense of unfairness
actually come from
>> well there's quite a few actually uh you
see u one of the things that US was
treating the pure deficit as the only
reason they start the tariff war I was
giving a talk just just last April two a
few months ago at the UN security
council
>> where they called a special arena
meeting in New York 80 countries
represented the UN participated where I
gave a speech there I was saying that
for example US only looking at the goods
deficit you know merchandise but out of
that deficit was maybe you know 30 40
50% was produced by multinational 30% by
US for example out of the 400 billion
deficit that Trump is levy on China 300
some billion deficit He immediately
waved 100 billion because a lot of the
companies are made goods in China. Apple
has to source their iPhone from India
but it's not enough. Uh so they have to
lift that sanctions on those deficit
anyway and there's a lot of intertwin
but also US enjoyed $1 trillion trade
surplus on the service trade. They're
not counting that and also the
calculation about China's export. For
example, every every phone we made in
China, iPhone made here, China probably
made the labor cost. You know, 80% was
made by multinationals EV cars the same.
So when you just purely looking at the
trade deficit numbers, a lot of money
was not made in China, was made by
international multinational companies
and they're not sending back to the
country. So that's why I I agree with
President Trump to have more investment
back to us because multinational made a
lot of money in China and elsewhere. But
they should really uh investment back uh
rather than put into tax heavens. So
that's why the global minimum tax
proposed by OECD has agreed by over 100
some countries but it's not practiced
yet on that now. So that's one aspect.
The other aspect I could say is the for
example US is starting these sanctions
on China for example forbidden the use
selling the trips to China. So that that
is really an also they called in the
Trump administration you know high fence
small yard and all those thing and
there's 1,500 Chinese companies on the
US entity the list I mean maybe China
has a a dozen or two dozen of US company
but compared with magnitude of of US is
too much too many over the sec overuse
of the security raises to really
restrict all the Chinese companies on
that so that really become a problem and
So that's why China starting to say okay
if chips can be the do use goods right
you can say okay can be used for
security or military same is true for
rare earth right rare earth can be
making for airplanes tank tanks
everything so when China start a little
bit on that then US starting to relax on
the sale of the chips now uh quite a bit
so you can see uh you know morally u
it's the same reason if US doing things
in the first term China didn't respond
like that but now China starting to
respond like that. So I think that's why
we see quite a few agreement made by
between US and Chinese officials because
China is much resilient now much
stronger and also US has realized if
they really sanction so hard on China
the Christmas shopping season we're
coming up their shelves will be empty
and we could you know American consumer
will suffer and then that going to hurt
Trump's base uh that's why they keep
extending uh they seems more uh they
talk to each other more more friendly
than talk to Indian Brazil and others So
I think they they probably realize
they're two largest economy. They can
really organize each other. They have to
find a way to collaborate.
>> The uh the Christmas shopping season is
my personal Super Bowl.
>> Yes. Earlier this year, actually not
that long ago, Bloomberg reported, so
therefore it's absolutely true. Uh it
says, quote, "Officials in Beijing
verbally encouraged regulatory agencies
and local governments to curb technology
transfers and equipment exports to India
and Southeast Asia." And there were some
stories about Foxcon engineers for
example who may have been part of some
sort of moving the supply chain of those
Apple uh iPhones that you meant part of
the final assembly perhaps to India and
this report that uh Chinese officials
may have been pushing back against it. I
get like rhetorically the existing
system where American companies do a lot
of manufacturing or in China has been
incredibly beneficial. Is China totally
comfortable with the fact that as part
of this globalization some of this
manufacturing may end up leaving or is
uh you know US seeks to diversify its
sources is China comfortable with this
>> China's I think it's pretty comfortable
now that's why China is more confident
for example 2019 when before co US is
largest trading partner of China and now
US fall into the third place or even
fourth place now because ASA become the
largest place trading part of China
since the asset uh regional
comprehensive partnership agreement and
then that that is actually happening
because uh you know Vietnam become China
fourth largest trading partner now and
Indonesia, Malaysia and now expanded to
Latin American you know most Latin
American countries China is their
largest trading partner and also with
Africa now China lifted all the tariff
from African countries products coming
to China you see a flood of African
products coming to China so so I think
you know that probably China doesn't
mind there's the low maybe a little bit
labor intensive because the labor
average labor workforce migrant workers
age is 43 years old it's getting old
China so there's a lot of shoe making or
you know low low income labor cost jobs
went to Vietnam went to Asia China
really uh doesn't mind that China now is
focused on the high end now for example
China is focused on the green power
transmission car
>> there's no curbs like there's no curbs
as far There's like from your
perspective there's no impulse of the
government to curb moving some of these
more advanced things again talk about
iPhones and such to a country like
India.
>> Not really. I I think China still you
encouraged the investment for example
BYD or uh you know CL and I I know quite
a few companies still very bullish
investing overseas. There may be
sensitive military or rare earth stuff
that China may be question a little bit
but but on the general I think things
are still quite open. Yeah. Is there an
argument to be made that China should
perhaps open its own economy further if
you know it actually desires more
economic integration with the rest of
the world because we're talking about
globalization still but China still has
capital controls still has currency
controls still has some restrictions on
investment and things like that should
it be more open
>> absolutely I I agree with you I think
China should be more open and that's why
we be that's our think tank role to
promote that. For example, we propose be
promoting the the visa. Now, China has
issued the unilaterally issued the visa
for 40ome countries, now European
countries, Australia, Japan, South
Korea. I I urge also you recommend China
to policy makers to open visa for US
citizens, for Canadian citizens coming
to China free. But also on the trade
policy, I think there there should be
more liberalization continuously. I know
that the government is looking at that
and the 15th five years plan will
probably be even more open. Of course,
there's always rooms to improve. I
totally agree. And uh uh they have
opened the financial sector quite a long
time ago. And uh as you say maybe
currency they should be more convertible
and also on the on the investment in the
culture in the in the in the you know
other areas uh pharmaceutical and and
now China also welcome foreign
university come to China to open their
branches and doing I'm I'm on the board
of Duke Kensangan University in China
which is John Van between Duke
University and Wuhan University. uh you
know we have so many international
student there and NYU Shanghai is
operating very well so we hope to have
more global uh exchanges I agree with
you you know there there there's still
more rooms that's why I think this kind
of talk between China and the US now we
see Tik Tok is almost maybe have a deal
there and it's great so we we this is
the style we should continuously talk
and engage and reach agreement and open
up further uh to accommodate each other
>> first comes diplomacy through dance
videos, Joe. And then comes an easing of
uh currency restrictions.
>> Well, podcast recordings have to be
right. And just to be clear, you know,
obviously we don't expect you to be the
representative of the entire Chinese
perspective. Tracy and I need to
establish that we do not represent the
entire United States and the questions
that we have. You mentioned the goods
trade deficit and of course one of the
things is you know obviously China has
gotten much richer thanks to the booming
industrial sector. The US has benefited
from a lot of less expensive, more
sophisticated goods that it buys. But
there is this source of concern, and I
say this, you know, a couple weeks after
that military parade, there is a source
of concern that without a robust
American manufacturing capacity, that we
can no longer be a powerful military
country as well. And I know I do not
believe it is China's role to sort of
help the US figure out its industrial
capacity questions. Nonetheless, from
the perspective, does the US concern
make sense to you? Perhaps there are
things that seem unfair, certain
technology transfer restrictions seem
counter to the spirit of globalization,
etc. But is the US fundamentally wrong
to be concerned that as more and more of
the world's share, however you want to
measure it, of manufacturing of advanced
goods somehow becomes centered around
China that that long-term weakens the
national security position of the United
States.
>> Well, I I I think we are now in a more
intertwined war now and there's lot
there's quite a bit of a competitive
advantage like you know David Victo
mentioned many years ago. So what I
think US is still leading US is very
good at uh uh inventing innovation. You
see Silicon Valley, you see AI, you
know, by the way uh Jason Hong said half
of the AI talents coming from China. You
know, US is a big harvest of Chinese
talent too. And uh that's why I'm saying
several million Chinese went to United
States. I mean probably half of them
return uh still have remain. uh that
greatly benefit the US economy. So what
I think that that is really US is good
doing zero to one maybe China is good at
one to 100. So out of the world 100
university top 50 still in the United
States. The reason China did all those
manufacturing because as I mentioned
China has 70% of the global speed
railway 60% of global 5G networks 10
largest container port seven of in they
have the infrastructure to do that. So
this is a value chain supply chain for
the world not for China. So made in
China is made for the world. I think US
only worry about if they can make you
cannot make a big ships or or aircraft.
Now they go to South Korea to do that
now. Right. So they they still find a
way to do that. But I don't think that
you you have to depend totally on the
manufacturing. So if if if if we are
living in the pre uh uh you know trade
war era you know where we we buy so much
chips from US China 70% of China energy
depends on import China spend more money
buying the chips than China importing
energy so now you say they're not
selling to China then the US company
losing the big profit uh center and then
they they really reduce their R&D budget
and China is forced to do reinvent well
and there's a lot of waste there. So we
see this uh uh separation is really no
good all on security reasons. We should
not overseerize and we should really
display our own each other's competitive
advantage.
>> I want to ask one more question about
security philosophy. Obviously when
Russia invaded Ukraine, the US imposed
all kinds of sanctions on Russia and
tried to constrain its ability to trade
at all or make any money. going back to
Israel's war in Gaza and you expressed
the horror that you see from that and
the sort of response to that. But China
still trades with Israel as the US does
in the future in a sort of different uh
global world order. Would it ever be
part of China's diplomatic arsenal to
take a more heavy hand in some of these
conflicts and say, "Oh, we're not going
to trade you. We're not going to sell
you advanced technology that you need to
run your economy or run your military."
etc. Because so far, despite the sort of
concerns or the the response, there
hasn't been any change in the trading
relationship. Could it ever get to that
point where China views its sort of
diplomatic commercial power that way in
conflicts that it's not directly
involved in?
>> Well, I think China certainly would like
to do more, you know, like what
happening on the WHO, China's already
fulfilled its obligations, too. I I
think the key is really we need to
restore the UN uh authority and
principle uh particularly the UN
security council. Maybe we should also
reform that too. Maybe we should add G20
uh members other 16 G20 members as
associate permanent member of UN and and
we should really not let the unilateral
single veto be abused. uh for for
example since the founding of UN Russia
over abused the use the VA 100 sometimes
20 40 times US 100 times China 20 times
we we we need to really control that so
I think we reform UN to reflect this
multipolar world and in the future if
there any other there's any problem
happen let's send the UN peacekeeping
force
>> to do that and so if the all the
security member have a big majority and
general assembly have a big majority we
make that happen. So I think reform this
multipolar world we also need to reform
you to reflect that because uh the world
is no longer fits the the superructure
does not fit the reality today now.
>> All right. Uh Henry Wong founder and
president uh for center for China and
globalization. So fantastic to have you
on the show. Can we do a live odd lots
in Beijing with you at some point?
>> Yeah. Yeah, please. We welcome that.
>> All right. We are going to as soon as
>> as soon as we get off this call, we are
going to begin the preparations to
figure out how we're going to make this
happen. So great chatting you with you.
Thank you for staying up late uh in your
time to talk with us and hope to talk to
you again soon.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you so much both of you. Thank you
so much.
[Music]
Tracy, I really enjoyed that
conversation. It was interesting
thinking about, you know, this idea that
rhetorically
there are a lot of people on both sides
of the aisle who say things like, "Oh,
we need to get out of this sort of
competition framework, etc." It doesn't
really feel like anything is actually
happening on that front.
>> Yes. One thing that struck me from the
conversation was I guess how um
economically oriented it feels like all
of Chinese policy actually is. And I
suppose maybe that gets back to this
idea, this is an old idea now, but that
social contract idea about the CCP. So
as long as people feel that their lives
are getting better,
>> then the CCP has strong support. I think
the economic focus really came through
in that conversation.
I think you know obviously in from the
US perspective
there is this view that you know Henry
used the word global policeman and a lot
of people would say yes absolutely and
that a big role of the US Navy
specifically is enforcing the fact or
freeing the world for trade right that
part of the reason that the world can
trade freely
>> that that's like a public good providing
>> a public good and Adam Posen has talked
about this and Others have talked about
this idea that these things go hand in
hand. And it's interesting because so
Henry talked about this impulse for
continuation of global trade including
with the US etc. There clearly to my
mind seems to be less of an appetite
from China to like or it's not obvious
that there is a
>> to fill the gap.
>> Yeah. Or that you know and I guess
there's question like does the world
need such muscle to trade, right? Does
could you have a world of trade where
there is not one entity that has a truly
global military footprint? I think these
are really interesting questions. Henry
of course talked about, especially in
that last answer, restrengthening the
UN, etc.
>> restructuring
>> restructuring the UN. Exactly. It's not
entirely obvious to me that these
institutions as they're constructed can
really be revived even with um lots of
Chinese money going into them. I think
that's still kind of TBD.
>> Well, I think this is it, right? Even if
you restructured the security council so
that you know you wouldn't have one
powerful member um vetoing stuff all the
time. Even if people agreed to do
things, what is the UN actually going to
do? Right.
>> Right. What is the UN actually going to
do? I don't know. We didn't get into it
that much, but like the idea of a sort
of more I don't know bricks composed
peacekeeping force. I bet there are a
lot of people in the US who would love
that. They're like, "Yeah, let's have
peace. Let's have a ceasefire. Someone
else take care of let's have a ceasefire
in Russia and Ukraine and also let's not
have it be particularly dominated by
Western peacekeepers shouldering that
burden. I bet a lot of people in the US
would love that. I would, you know, had
with more time. I would love to really
explore like what the constraints on
that actually happening are there. But I
thought that was a uh a very useful sort
of overview of some of these questions
from the Chinese perspective.
>> Absolutely. Don't explore the
constraints, Joe. Just take credit for
solving US China tensions on the
podcast. Okay. In less than an hour. Um
shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Armano
Bennett atbot and Kaleb Brooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes and you can chat about all
of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you want us
to go to Beijing and talk to more people
on the ground, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]